All right, let's take a look at some of the code for
the Pan-Tompkins algorithm and see how this affects the signal that we're working with.
This is the code for the algorithm,
but I'll start with this function,
which is the entry point.
You can see that we begin with our BandpassFilter,
then we do our one-sample difference,
the element-wise square, and finally the moving sum.
We take this pre-process signal and we find the peaks,
and then we threshold those peaks to return the QRS complex locations.
You should download this notebook and go through these functions,
to become familiar with the code.
But in this video,
I'll just show you what this algorithm does to our EKG signal.
So this is an example of a clean EKG signal from a mobile device,
and if we zoom in, we can see that we have nice large,
QRS complexes, not much baseline noise,
and we see the P wave,
the QRS complex, the T wave,
and the cycle repeats over and over again.
Then we can take a look at how our pre-processing steps change the signal.
So down here we have our original EKG,
and then up here is the pre-process signal.
The first thing you notice is that we have
these really large spikes around the QRS complexes.
In the pre-process signal,
there are around 35,000-40,000,
whereas in the original EKG our QRS complexes are between 600 and 700.
We also have T waves around one and 200.
But in the pre-process signal,
these T waves are all but gone.
In this very clean signal,
we can see that the Pan-Tompkins algorithm
is able to pick out every single QRS complex location.
Now let's take a look at a more interesting EKG signal.
We can see that this one is definitely a lot noisier.
We have a lot more baseline noise.
The QRS complexes aren't as large and sometimes they're even smaller than the T wave.
So this is a good opportunity to take a look at what
each of the pre-processing steps do individually.
Down here we have the original EKG signal,
and then up here is just a BandpassFiltered version of that signal,
and you can really see how when you remove a lot of frequency components,
the signal gets fairly distorted.
Let's take a look at what it looks like after we do our one-sample difference.
If you squint, you can see that we have larger waves around the QRS complexes.
But it's still really hard to interpret this waveform.
When we square it,
now we start to see some more dramatic changes in our signal.
The first thing you'll notice is that there's no more negative values.
That's because the square, will flip it around,
and we also start to put more distance in-between the QRS complexes,
and the T waves.
What the squaring is doing is non-linearly amplifying our signal.
Let's take a look at the moving sum.
So the moving sum ties things up very nicely.
We're able to see that we can put quite a bit of
distance between the QRS complex and the T wave.
In the second heartbeats,
this effect is much more dramatic.
There's almost no T wave here but when we started out,
the T-wave was around the same size as the QRS complex.
In this third heartbeat we see we're not doing so great.
While we did manage to make the QRS complex larger than the T wave when it originally,
it started out much smaller,
we didn't put a whole lot of distance between the two,
and it's unlikely that our simple detection rules will be able to tease this one apart.
So let's take a look at how Pan-Tompkins does.
As expected, we get the first couple heartbeats in the last couple heartbeats,
and were unable to detect the middle one.
So the overall goal here isn't necessarily to
understand the Pan-Tompkins algorithm per say.
It's really to get to a place where we can solve this kind of a problem in
any domain where you have some knowledge of the underlying physiology,
and the signal characteristics,
and the noise characteristics.
You can do for your task what Pan-Tompkins does for the QRS complex detection.
As you learn more about these tools and the operations that you have that
can boost signal and suppress noise in your specific domain,
you'll be able to build a better intuition for
designing your own algorithm on your own problem.
In the following exercise,
we'll run the Pan-Tompkins algorithm on a large data set,
and then use a more sophisticated detection algorithm
to improve the performance of our detector.